Currently, everyone is occupied with productivity and lifestyle. However, such circumstances can also lead to risks associated with the inability of individuals to sustain focus and concentration when doing passive control activities. This work presents the development of a passive brain-computer interface that utilizes electroencephalographic (EEG) brain activity imaging and machine learning data processing techniques to monitor the mental attention states of individuals, including focused, unfocused, and drowsy states. A pipeline for processing EEG data and an algorithm for detecting mental states using the Support Vector Machine (SVM) approach were developed and compared with the k-Nearest Neighbor and Adaptive Decision Tree Classifier. In order to gather EEG data from 34 trials available on Kaggle, a traditional EEG headgear was altered. The study revealed that alterations in EEG activity within the frontal and parietal lobes, specifically between the 1-5 Hz and 10-15 Hz frequency ranges, were linked to variations in individuals' attention levels. In experimental conditions, we successfully utilized these modifications to accurately determine people' attention state with a maximum accuracy of 92.6 % and an average accuracy of 91.3%. This was achieved by employing a mental state detector based on Support Vector Machines (SVM) in a modified version of the continuous performance task.  In addition, I conducted experiments with alternative models to evaluate their effectiveness, which yielded highly accurate results. The findings provide valuable insights for the development of future systems aimed at monitoring the physiological condition of individuals using EEG brain activity data.
